#summary combinatoricslib 2.0

* [http://code.google.com/p/combinatoricslib/downloads/list CombinatoricsLib 2.0]* is a Java library for generating combinatorial objects of any types.

= Features =

This library can generate the combinatorial objects such as: 
 # *[#1._Permutations_without_repetitions Permutations without repetitions]*
 # *[#2._Permutations_with_repetitions Permutations with repetitions]*
 # *[#3._Combinations_without_repetitions Combinations without repetitions]*
 # *[#4._Combinations_with_repetitions Combinations with repetitions]*
 # *[#5._Partitions Partitions]*
 # *[#6._Subsets Subsets]*
 # *[#7._Compositions Compositions]*


<b>CombinatoricsLib 2.0</b> allows generating vectors of any items. You should to specify the type of your elements as a parameter of vectors and generators. All generators implements the java interface {{{Iterable}}}, so they can be used in the "foreach" statement.

You can use the next table to select a generator

|| *Description* || *Is Order Important?* || *Is Repetition Allowed?* || *Generator* ||
|| [#2._Permutations_with_repetitions Permutations with repetitions] || Yes || Yes || {{{PermutationGenerator}}} ||
|| [#1._Permutations_without_repetitions Permutations without repetitions] || Yes || No || {{{PermutationWithRepetitionGenerator}}} ||
|| [#4._Combinations_with_repetitions Combinations with repetitions] || No || Yes || {{{MultiCombinationGenerator}}} ||
|| [#3._Combinations_without_repetitions Combinations without repetitions] || No || No || {{{SimpleCombinationGenerator}}} ||

How to download and use the library in Eclipse, please read this page HowToUseLibInEclipse   


= 1. Simple permutations (without repetition) =

A permutation is an ordering of a set in the context of all possible orderings. For example, the set containing the first three digits, 123, has six permutations: 123, 132, 213, 231, 312, and 321.

This is an example of the permutations of 3 string items (apple, orange, cherry):
{{{
   // Create the initial vector of 3 elements (apple, orange, cherry)
   ICombinatoricsVector<String> originalVector = Factory.createVector(new String[] { "apple", "orange", "cherry" });

   // Create the permutation generator by calling the appropriate method in the Factory class
   Generator<String> gen = Factory.createPermutationGenerator(originalVector);

   // Print the result
   for (ICombinatoricsVector<String> perm : gen)
      System.out.println(perm);
}}}

The result of 6 permutations
{{{
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, orange, cherry], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, cherry, orange], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([cherry, apple, orange], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([cherry, orange, apple], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([orange, cherry, apple], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([orange, apple, cherry], size=3)
}}}


= 2. Permutations with repetitions (Tuples) =

The permutation may have more elements than slots.  For example, the three possible permutation of 12 in three slots are: 111, 211, 121, 221, 112, 212, 122, and 222.

Let's generate all possible permutations with repetitions of 3 elements from the set of apple and orange.
{{{
   // Create the initial vector of 2 elements (apple, orange)
   ICombinatoricsVector<String> originalVector = Factory.createVector(new String[] { "apple", "orange" });

   // Create the generator by calling the appropriate method in the Factory class. 
   // Set the second parameter as 3, since we will generate 3-elemets permutations
   Generator<String> gen = Factory.createPermutationWithRepetitionGenerator(originalVector, 3);

   // Print the result
   for (ICombinatoricsVector<String> perm : gen)
      System.out.println( perm );
}}}

And the result of 8 permutations
{{{
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, apple, apple], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([orange, apple, apple], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, orange, apple], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([orange, orange, apple], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, apple, orange], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([orange, apple, orange], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, orange, orange], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([orange, orange, orange], size=3)
}}}

= 3. Simple combinations (without repetitions) =

A simple k-combination of a finite set S is a subset of k distinct elements of S. Specifying a subset does not arrange them in a particular order. As an example, a poker hand can be described as a 5-combination of cards from a 52-card deck: the 5 cards of the hand are all distinct, and the order of the cards in the hand does not matter.

Example. Generate 3-combination of the set (red, black, white, green, blue).
{{{
   // Create the initial vector
   ICombinatoricsVector<String> initialVector = Factory.createVector(
      new String[] { "red", "black", "white", "green", "blue" } );

   // Create a simple combination generator to generate 3-combinations of the initial vector
   Generator<String> gen = Factory.createSimpleCombinationGenerator(
      initialVector, 3);

   // Print all possible combinations
   for (ICombinatoricsVector<String> combination : gen) {
      System.out.println(combination);
   }
}}}

And the result of 10 combinations
{{{
   CombinatoricsVector=([red, black, white], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([red, black, green], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([red, black, blue], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([red, white, green], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([red, white, blue], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([red, green, blue], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([black, white, green], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([black, white, blue], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([black, green, blue], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([white, green, blue], size=3)
}}}

= 4. Combinations with repetitions =

A k-multicombination or k-combination with repetition of a finite set S is given by a sequence of k not necessarily distinct elements of S, where order is not taken into account.

As an example. Suppose there are 2 types of fruits (apple and orange) at a grocery store, and you want to buy 3 pieces of fruit. You could select
 # (apple, apple, apple)
 # (apple, apple, orange)
 # (apple, orange, orange)
 # (orange, orange, orange)

Example. Generate 3-combinations with repetitions of the set (apple, orange).
{{{
   // Create the initial vector of (apple, orange)
   ICombinatoricsVector<String> initialVector = Factory.createVector(
      new String[] { "apple", "orange" } );

   // Create a multi-combination generator to generate 3-combinations of
   // the initial vector
   Generator<String> gen = Factory.createMultiCombinationGenerator(	initialVector, 3);

   // Print all possible combinations
   for (ICombinatoricsVector<String> combination : gen) {
      System.out.println(combination);
   }
}}}

And the result of 4 combinations
{{{
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, apple, apple], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, apple, orange], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([apple, orange, orange], size=3)
   CombinatoricsVector=([orange, orange, orange], size=3)
}}}

= 5. Partitions =

In number theory, a partition of a positive integer n is a way of writing n as a sum of positive integers. Two sums that differ only in the order of their summands are considered to be the same partition; if order matters then the sum becomes a composition. A summand in a partition is also called a part.

The partitions of 5 are listed below:
 # 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1
 # 2 + 1 + 1 + 1
 # 2 + 2 + 1
 # 3 + 1 + 1
 # 3 + 2
 # 4 + 1
 # 5

The number of partitions of n is given by the partition function p(n). In number theory, the partition function p(n) represents the number of possible partitions of a natural number n, which is to say the number of distinct (and order independent) ways of representing n as a sum of natural numbers.

This is a code:
{{{
    // create partition generator of 5
    Generator<Integer> gen = new PartitionGenerator(5);

    // create iterator
    Iterator<CombinatoricsVector<Integer>> itr = gen.createIterator();
    
    // go through the iterator 
    while (itr.hasNext()) {
      CombinatoricsVector<Integer> partition = itr.next();
      System.out.println(partition);
    }
}}}

And the result 
{{{
   PartitionIterator=[#1, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 1, 1, 1, 1]], size=5]]
   PartitionIterator=[#2, CombinatoricsVector=[[2, 1, 1, 1]], size=4]]
   PartitionIterator=[#3, CombinatoricsVector=[[2, 2, 1]], size=3]]
   PartitionIterator=[#4, CombinatoricsVector=[[3, 1, 1]], size=3]]
   PartitionIterator=[#5, CombinatoricsVector=[[3, 2]], size=2]]
   PartitionIterator=[#6, CombinatoricsVector=[[4, 1]], size=2]]
   PartitionIterator=[#7, CombinatoricsVector=[[5]], size=1]]
}}}

= 6. Subsets =

A set A is a subset of a set B if A is "contained" inside B. A and B may coincide. The relationship of one set being a subset of another is called inclusion or sometimes containment.

Examples:
 * The set {1, 2} is a proper subset of {1, 2, 3}.
 * Any set is a subset of itself, but not a proper subset.
 * The empty set, denoted by ∅, is also a subset of any given set X.

All subsets of {1, 2, 3} are:
 # {}
 # {1}
 # {2}
 # {1, 2}
 # {3}
 # {1, 3}
 # {2, 3}
 # {1, 2, 3}

And code which generates all subsets of {one, two, three}
{{{
    // create array of initial items
    ArrayList<String> array = new ArrayList<String>();
    array.add("one");
    array.add("two");
    array.add("three");

    // create combinatorics vector
    CombinatoricsVector<String> initialVector = new CombinatoricsVector<String>(array);
    
    // create subset generator
    Generator<String> gen = new SubSetGenerator<String>(initialVector);

    // create iterator
    Iterator<CombinatoricsVector<String>> itr = gen.createIterator();
    // print the number of subsets
    System.out.println("Number of subsets is: " + gen.getNumberOfGeneratedObjects());

    // go through the iterator 
    while (itr.hasNext()) {
      CombinatoricsVector<String> subSet = itr.next();
      System.out.println(subSet);
    }    
}}}

And the result 
{{{
   Number of subsets is: 8
   SubSetIterator=[#1, CombinatoricsVector=[[]], size=0]]
   SubSetIterator=[#2, CombinatoricsVector=[[one]], size=1]]
   SubSetIterator=[#3, CombinatoricsVector=[[two]], size=1]]
   SubSetIterator=[#4, CombinatoricsVector=[[one, two]], size=2]]
   SubSetIterator=[#5, CombinatoricsVector=[[three]], size=1]]
   SubSetIterator=[#6, CombinatoricsVector=[[one, three]], size=2]]
   SubSetIterator=[#7, CombinatoricsVector=[[two, three]], size=2]]
   SubSetIterator=[#8, CombinatoricsVector=[[one, two, three]], size=3]]
}}}


= 7. Compositions =

A composition of an integer n is a way of writing n as the sum of a sequence of (strictly) positive integers. Two sequences that differ in the order of their terms define different compositions of their sum, while they are considered to define the same partition of that number (see. [#5._Partitions partitions] above).

The sixteen compositions of 5 are:
 # 5
 # 4+1
 # 3+2
 # 3+1+1
 # 2+3
 # 2+2+1
 # 2+1+2
 # 2+1+1+1
 # 1+4
 # 1+3+1
 # 1+2+2
 # 1+2+1+1
 # 1+1+3
 # 1+1+2+1
 # 1+1+1+2
 # 1+1+1+1+1.

Compare this with the seven partitions of 5 (see [#5._Partitions partitions] above):
 # 5
 # 4+1
 # 3+2
 # 3+1+1
 # 2+2+1
 # 2+1+1+1
 # 1+1+1+1+1.

Example. Generate compositions of 5.
{{{
    // create composition generator of 5
    Generator<Integer> gen = new CompositionGenerator(5);

    // create iterator
    Iterator<CombinatoricsVector<Integer>> itr = gen.createIterator();
    
    // go through the iterator 
    while (itr.hasNext()) {
      CombinatoricsVector<Integer> composition = itr.next();
      System.out.println(composition);
    }
}}}

And the result 
{{{
   CompositionIterator=[#1, CombinatoricsVector=[[5]], size=1]]
   CompositionIterator=[#2, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 4]], size=2]]
   CompositionIterator=[#3, CombinatoricsVector=[[2, 3]], size=2]]
   CompositionIterator=[#4, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 1, 3]], size=3]]
   CompositionIterator=[#5, CombinatoricsVector=[[3, 2]], size=2]]
   CompositionIterator=[#6, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 2, 2]], size=3]]
   CompositionIterator=[#7, CombinatoricsVector=[[2, 1, 2]], size=3]]
   CompositionIterator=[#8, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 1, 1, 2]], size=4]]
   CompositionIterator=[#9, CombinatoricsVector=[[4, 1]], size=2]]
   CompositionIterator=[#10, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 3, 1]], size=3]]
   CompositionIterator=[#11, CombinatoricsVector=[[2, 2, 1]], size=3]]
   CompositionIterator=[#12, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 1, 2, 1]], size=4]]
   CompositionIterator=[#13, CombinatoricsVector=[[3, 1, 1]], size=3]]
   CompositionIterator=[#14, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 2, 1, 1]], size=4]]
   CompositionIterator=[#15, CombinatoricsVector=[[2, 1, 1, 1]], size=4]]
   CompositionIterator=[#16, CombinatoricsVector=[[1, 1, 1, 1, 1]], size=5]]
}}}

<g:plusone size="medium"></g:plusone>